---
chapter: 05
---

# CHAPTER V

## THE MARCH ON MOSCOW

### I. - HARD AT THE DON

In the spring of 1919 the position of General Denikin's Armies was as follows—

The French, who had been occupying [[odessa|Odessa|1]] after the fall of the Hetman, had evacuated the town without any warning at the end of March, and the pretence of a Russian Army which was just being formed there had dwindled away to nothing.

[[crimea|The Crimea|1]] was abandoned, all but the isthmus of [[kerch|Kertch|1]], where General Schilling had concentrated some troops, which the Allied fleet were supporting with their artillery.

In the [[donbas|Donetz|1]] area the Volunteer Corps, under General May-Mayevsky, was still holding out against the enemy, who were doing then utmost to make themselves masters of the coalfields. There was some very heavy fighting, and our forces were diminishing daily. On the left flank, near [[mariupol|Marioupol|1]], a small group or our troops were face to face with the Reds. We intended to concentrate a cavalry corps, commanded by General Chkouro, on May-Mayevsky’s right flank. This corps was in cooperation with the Army of [[don_region|the Don|1]]. The first division of my [[kuban_region|Kuban|1]] Cossacks in Pokrovsky's Company had received marching-orders for the [[manych|Manytsch|1]] front, simultaneously a division of [[terek_region|Terek|1]] Cossacks transferred from the Caucasian forces was supposed to take its place. Until these troops arrived, the whole [[rostov_on_don|Rostov|1]] region, an extremely important area, was left uncovered. There was panic in the great town of [[rostov_on_don|Rostov|2]], one of Russia's chief centres of commerce. There was a large Bolshevist element there, which raised its head when it realized that the town had been left empty of troops.

I tried to hasten the arrival of the Cossacks, who were already on the march, and sent an armored car to cover the village of [[bataisk|Bataisk|1]], which was some versts from the town on the further bank of [[don_river|the Don|1]]. The police gave notice of disturbances in the working-class part of the town, and of the arrival of Bolshevik emissaries. I ordered the arrest of those we proved to be Red agents. The civil administration protested that it was dangerous to do this until the troops arrived, and that it could only add to our difficulties. However, I believed my course of action to be for the best, and that same night I had seventy people thrown into prison, and six of them sent up for court-martial, one of them was an influential lawyer who had compromised himself hopelessly a long time ago. There was a great to-do amongst the disaffected classes. All six were condemned to death and shot within twenty-four hours. Then things quietened down again and remained quiet. General Denikin, who in effect had taken over the command on the [[manych|Manytsch|2]] front, was soon convinced that the troops with which he was operating were insufficient, and he had to use those I had suggested, as I had prophesied to his chief-of-staff. In [[manych|Manytsch|3]] one bitter struggle succeeded another. Twice our troops, under General Chatilov, forced the river, and twice they were beaten back. The bed of the [[manych|Manytsch|4]] was too muddy to get the artillery across the ford, and we could do nothing without it. The situation was also rather worse in [[donbas|the Donetz|2]] area, but we held out there in spite of everything.

On April 30th I went to report on our position in the [[donbas|Donetz|3]] to the Commander-in-Chief, for it had become critical. I asked him how things were going on the [[manych|Manytsch|5]] front. He told me that in spite of the numerous reinforcements, which included Koutepov’s infantry division, Pokrovsky's cavalry troop, Chatilov's division, Greffs' division, Saveliev's Cossack cavalry troop, Zykov’s brigade, and a brigade of Cossacks of the Guard, that is to say, an infantry division and seven and a half cavalry divisions altogether, they were making but little headway. And, he added bitterly: "Here we have thirty cavalry regiments—thirty! And they are doing absolutely nothing."

I asked him who was at the head of this mass of cavalry, and was astonished to learn that there was no unity of command. I observed that under these conditions it was difficult to hope for good results. To achieve anything there had to be one mind to coordinate the action of the cavalry.

"You are quite right," said the General, "but no general will submit to the authority of any other, for they are all equal."

I was much struck by the Commander-in-Chief's reply. General Denikin, who appeared to be so strong-willed and inflexible, showed an inexplicable lack of resolution when dealing with his colleagues. He himself was a real soldier, for he was hard on himself, but it seemed that he dared not demand as much from his subordinates. In this instance he could not bring himself to put one general under the orders of another. General Romanovsky was present at one interview, and said to me. "Help us, and the cavalry will achieve unity; all the generals would obey you cheerfully."

I was certain that only coordinated action by the cavalry could end this unlucky campaign which had lasted too long already, and I liked the idea of controlling great masses of cavalry and making them play a leading part. So, although I was still ill, I consented to take over the command. I sent for several officers and my horses, and went to the [[manych|Manytsch|6]] front.

I took stock of the situation from a church tower. The enemy forces were massed in a large village—[[velikoknyazheskaya|Veliko-kniageskaia|1]]—and on its outskirts, on the northern bank of the river. The thoroughfares on the south and west of the village were defended by trenches. The enemy's artillery was powerful—it was impossible to force a passage. To the east, the Reds had only a very small observation corps, but the river was so shallow there that it was more like a swamp than a watercourse, and so muddy that the artillery could never be got across the ford without sticking fast. And without artillery we could achieve nothing, as we knew from experience.

I decided to improvise a causeway, using the numerous wooden fences to be found in the neighboring villages. They had to be fastened together to form a floor, which could be put down over the mud to act as a magic carpet for the artillery. It had to be held under the water very firmly, otherwise it would rise to the surface; indeed, it needed to be pinned down with heavy weights. I ordered an experiment to be made on a dirty little lake in our rear. The experiment was very successful, and I had a large number of these platforms made.

Eighteen kilometres to the east of the village, I found a suitable spot for the crossing, and gave the necessary orders.

We fixed the attack for May 4th. I reached the spot at nightfall. The regiments arrived one after the other. They were working the whole night long, and at dawn the crossing began. The bare, flat steppes, covered with briny pools, seemed endless. The regiments, which had already crossed the [[manych|Manytsch|7]] and were marching in single file, looked like a gigantic snake crawling across a desert. By midday two cavalry corps and all the artillery had crossed the river, and in the distance our advance-guard was driving the enemy back towards the west. General Chatilov took several trenches and more than one thousand five hundred prisoners that day.

Our bivouac was not pleasant. It was a very cold night, and we had not a stick or a bundle of straw with which to light a fire, nor had we a drop of drinkable water for the men or horses. Nobody slept that night.

The battle began again at dawn. The enemy put up a desperate resistance, but in vain. General Pokrovsky forced them to fall back on their base. His men were occupying the farms where once the great studs which had furnished our cavalry with remounts had been kept. They had been very prosperous farms, but now they were nothing but a heap of ruins. The houses were roofless and windowless, the gardens trampled down, the sheds doorless and full of rusty, broken agricultural implements. An enormous number of dead oxen and horses littered the pastures and polluted the air.

The attack on the whole front was to begin at five o'clock. An unusually high haystack the size of a two-storey house served me as an observation-post. I could see the artillery firing on two sides, and the cavalry divisions taking up their position. Our aircraft was circling over [[velikoknyazheskaya|Veliko-kniageskaia|2]]. On the left flank, our first division set off at a gallop amidst thundering cheers and disappeared behind a hill. General Pokrovsky’s corps was getting into battle-order.

Suddenly I heard guns in our rear. One of General Zykov's orderlies came to tell me that great masses of enemy cavalry had turned our right flank. With the help of my field-glasses I could see the [[astrakhan|Astrakhan|1]] Cossacks of Zykov's division marching to their help, shells were bursting all around them. Suddenly the Cossack ranks broke and turned tail. I leapt into my car, turned to Pokrovsky's corps, and sent a division to meet the Reds, who were driven back. Once more the troops bivouacked on the spot.

The enemy's reinforcements had come up, and could have put us in a very awkward position at any moment. There was only one way of retreat open behind us, and only an inadequate fortress on the right bank of the [[manych|Manytsch|8]], and I had no fresh reserves.

On the 6th we resumed the offensive. For three days my troops had scarcely slept and had eaten no hot food; the horses had had nothing to drink, both men and horses were exhausted.

But we had to finish the job, cost what it might. I spoke to the men, and I saw that, in spite of their weariness, they were doing their work.

The artillery opened the attack, and I harangued the troops, had the colours unfurled, and drew up the men in battle-array to the sounds of music, as though it had been a parade.

The bugles rang out, the standards floated on the breeze, swords flashed in the sun, a lusty cheer went up, and the mass of cavalry charged, soon to disappear in a whirlwind of dust. The enemy lost many men and horses, the defeated units wavered and began a hurried retreat.

[[velikoknyazheskaya|Veliko-kniageskaia|3]], which had held out for so long, was taken. There was no longer any danger of our forces being cut off from Caucasia, and the 10th Red Army was wiped out. In the last three days we had taken fifteen thousand prisoners, fifty-five guns, and one hundred and fifty machine-guns.

Now there was nothing to prevent us from marching on [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|1]] and then on to the [[volga_river|Volga|1]].

The enemy were in flight northwards, blowing up the bridges and destroying the railroads as they went. I ordered Chatilov’s company to pursue them.

The next day I entered [[velikoknyazheskaya|Veliko-kniageskaia|4]], where Chatilov had already established his Headquarters. Some Circassians who had been caught in the very act of marauding were brought in I had them court-martialed, and two hours later five of them were hanged.

I ordered their bodies to be left on the gallows for a few days, to prove to the troops and the civil population that no excesses would be tolerated.

A little while after, General Denikin arrived. He was overjoyed and embraced me. He had been present at the cavalry attack, and said that he had never, during the whole Civil War, seen artillery fire as brisk as the enemy's had been when they had fired on our charging cavalry.

The troops operating on the [[manych|Manytsch|9]], to wit, Pokrovsky’s cavalry troop, Chatilov’s and Saveliev’s company of [[don_region|Don Cossacks|2]], the Circassian and the [[astrakhan|Astrakhan|2]] Cossack divisions, the 6th infantry division, and Ulagay’s cavalry troop, which was maneuvering in the east, were to form henceforth the Caucasian Army. The troops in the coalfield area of [[donbas|Donetz|4]], under General May-Mayevsky, received the title of the Volunteer Army. My Army was ordered to [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|2]] and to take it.

“Well,” Denikin said to me, “when are you going to win [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|3]] for us?”

I told him that if everything went according to plan, we would be at the gates of the town in three weeks. The rest depended not on me, but on him. It was impossible to take the town without artillery and infantry. General Denikin promised to send me a Cossack infantry brigade and the necessary artillery. As his train moved out, he smilingly held up three fingers to me—an allusion to the three weeks in which [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|4]] was to be taken.

After the defeat of the enemy at [[manych|Manytsch|10]], General Denikin lost his fear of seeing the armies cut off from their base, and concentrated all of his efforts on [[kharkiv|Kharkov|1]], where the situation had improved somewhat.

I kept my promise. Three weeks later we were at the gates of [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|5]]. But at what a price! We had traversed three hundred kilometres of salty steppe-land which lacked water and vegetation of any sort; the whole time we had been fighting the enemy, who occupied strongly fortified positions at many points. The nearer we got to the town, the more stubborn was the resistance of the Reds, whose ranks were constantly being reinforced by the arrival of fresh troops. As my cars were “in dock”, and, in spite of my entreaties, Headquarters had not sent me any new ones, I did most of the journey on horseback, riding with the fourth troop (Chatilov’s).

For days we saw neither houses nor people, nothing but a few signalman’s huts, and most of these even were abandoned. Sometimes a convoy of wounded would pass us—hundreds of carts drawn by camels, which scarcely seemed to move, so slow was their pace—and they still had hundreds of kilometres to cover, weeks to travel, before they reached their destination.

The grilling sun beat down on the poor wretches lying there in the carts, which were devoid of hoods and springs; the axles were never oiled, and made an unholy din in consequence. And for days there was not a drop of water to refresh the sufferers.

I remember one night which we spent in the open, on the eve of a bloody battle. It was a beautiful night, the sky was covered with stars, the steppe with tents. I was lying on my cloak, my saddle for a pillow, and I could hear my soldiers laughing and talking, the horses snorting with fear in the mist, and the firing in the distance. I felt I was back in the times when the technique of modern warfare was still unknown—when telegraphs, telephones, motor-cars, lorries, and railways did not exist, when the commander marched with his troops, slept on the ground as they did, and sometimes lacked water to quench his thirst, even as they.

We had kept our promise, but Headquarters had not kept theirs. The promised artillery, infantry, cars, and lorries had not arrived, and they had done nothing to help us put the Velikokniageskaia-[[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|6]] railway in good repair—and it was our only line of communication. I had sent dispatch after dispatch in vain—nothing happened. Headquarters seemed to have forgotten us. All its attention was concentrated on the [[kharkiv|Kharkov|2]] front.

On May 22nd, after General Pokrovsky had won a victory, I telegraphed to the Commander-in-Chief: “it would be criminal not to follow up our success. What we can do cheaply now will cost us huge losses in the future. Courage is not enough. The cavalry can do wonders, but it cannot remove barbed wire. If you do not send me infantry, guns, munitions, and more cars, without which I cannot move about and direct the troops as I should, our success will be but a Pyrrhic victory.”

In a dispatch of May 24th, in which I more or less repeated the same thing, I added: “I realize the necessity of continuing operations on other fronts, but I must insist that if the [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|7]] operations fails or is delayed, all your other operations will come to nothing. You promised me artillery and infantry, and I based my whole campaign on your promise. While I held my command in Caucasia, I never asked you for a single man; today I insist on having what is indispensable. I feel it my duty to tell you the truth quite crudely like this.”

[[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|8]] was surrounded by many lines of trenches and four or five lines of barbed wire. A strong artillery force defended the approaches.

On May 29th I summoned a Council of War. I told the generals who composed it that it was unlikely that the infantry and artillery we were expecting would arrive yet awhile, and I asked their advice: should we risk an attack, or merely entrench ourselves and await the arrival of reinforcements? It was unlikely that an immediate attack would succeed, but on the other hand the enemy were receiving reinforcements dally, and making their position more and more secure, so that even if we waited we would have very little more chance of success. Our troops were exhausted by the immense difficulties of their march across the desert, and had been visualizing [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|9]] as the Promised Land. If we kept them waiting too long now, they would be bitterly disappointed. Moreover, it was quite possible that the enemy would take the offensive. If we were driven back on to the steppe, where there were no means of getting fresh provisions, our plight would indeed be terrible. The Council was unanimously of the opinion that we must attack.

On June 1st our attacking force got through the enemy's lines and took several villages. But after two days of hard fighting, I realized that all our efforts to take the town would be fruitless. The enemy's artillery was too powerful, our casualties were enormous. We had lost five lieutenant-generals, three brigadier-generals, and eleven captains. Our ammunition had run out. We had to abandon the offensive and resume our old position.

On June 4th the enemy took the offensive, supported by all their artillery and fresh reinforcements. I withdrew my troops to within twenty kilometres of the further bank of the River Tchervlennia, and decided to wait there for the promised reinforcements.

The failure of our attack and the number of our casualties caused me intense anxiety, which was all the more acute because I could do nothing. I therefore wrote to General Denikin. I reminded him of the promises he had made me which his General Staff had not fulfilled, I said that since I was only too sure that things would be the same in the future, I could not assume any further responsibility, and requested that, as soon as the [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|10]] enterprise came to an end, he would appoint someone else in my place. I sent this letter to the Commander-in-Chief by an officer who knew its contents. On the urgent entreaties of General Yusefovitch, however, I stopped the delivery of this letter by telegram. Moreover, on June 4th, Headquarters let me know that they had issued an order to send me an infantry division, five batteries, three armored cars, and six tanks, and in addition the railway was to be put under repair. I ordered the bearer of the letter to bring it back to me.

Meanwhile the Army of the Don and the Volunteer Army were doing better and better. There was rejoicing at [[rostov_on_don|Rostov|3]] and [[ekaterinodar|Ekaterinodar|1]]. Headquarters were obsessed with the desire to take [[moscow|Moscow|1]] at the earliest possible moment, and forgot that success did not depend solely upon a rapid advance, it was just as necessary to cover our flanks and keep possession of our base.

General May-Mayevsky, who had recently been appointed to the command of the Volunteer Army, was a good officer and knew his job, he got on well with his subordinates and men. If he had not worn a uniform, you would have taken him for a comedian from a little provincial theatre. He was as round as a barrel, and had a chubby face and a bulbous nose. He knew how to make himself pleasant, and success had not robbed him of his hearty manner. But his conduct at his headquarters in [[rostov_on_don|Rostov|4]] roused the indignation of every honest man. His orgies brought discredit on the Army and on authority in general. The rear of the Army was always badly organized. The generals had almost absolute power and thought themselves satraps.

The troops followed their example and considered everything permissible. Violence and abuse reigned supreme. As I have already said, at the beginning of the Civil War the Cossacks had been anxious to win back their possessions, and yet I had managed to inculcate ideas of lawfulness into my troops. When General Pokrovsky's men had been incorporated in my Army, even they had been forced to give up marauding. If a little firmness had achieved this result with the Cossacks, how much easier it should have been with the regular Army!

As the fresh troops could not possibly arrive until June 11th, I went back to my Headquarters, which were established at [[kotelnikovo|Kotelnikovo|1]] Station. Naoumenko, the Ataman of [[kuban_region|the Kuban|2]] campaign, joined me there. The question of raising an Army from the autonomous [[kuban_region|Kuban|3]] had again arisen, and there were still misunderstandings between the Commander-in-Chief and the autonomous Kubanian Government. Naoumenko told me that General Denikin and his staff were very annoyed with me. They considered that the tone of my dispatches was inadmissible. "General Wrangel," they said, "does not ask for things, he demands them, he seems to give us orders." Furthermore, they knew that I had not altogether shared their point of view in their misunderstanding with the Rada of [[kuban_region|the Kuban|4]].

On June 13th the Volunteer Army took [[kharkiv|Kharkov|3]]. The Army of the Don continued its northward march.

The [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|11]]-[[tikhoretsk|Tikhoretskaia|1]] railway had been repaired, and the long-expected reinforcements arrived during the night of the 16th. I resumed the initiative. The tanks and the armored cars went first, then the infantry. Once they had destroyed the barbed wire, the cavalry charged. The enemy were driven back on to their last line of trenches.

In the morning we returned to the charge and swept up to the last line of trenches. By the evening our troops were in the town.

The enemy fled towards the north. During these four days of fighting we took two armored cars, one hundred and thirty-one locomotives, ten thousand lorries, two thousand and eighty-five of them loaded with munitions, seventy guns, three hundred machine-guns, forty thousand prisoners, and innumerable cars and carts—an immense amount of spoil.

On the 19th, I entered [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|12]] and went to the Cathedral, where the Te Deum was sung. The archbishop who officiated had been forced to flee the town to escape death, and for weeks had laid in hiding in the suburbs, he had only just come back. The rest of the priests who took part in the service had just been released from prison by our soldiers. During the service the bishop and most of his subordinates wept.

That evening the Commander-in-Chief’s train drew into the station. He thanked us and looked at me with a smile. "Has your mood changed? It was not too good."

"Yes, Your Excellency, I have been through some very terrible moments."

In the report which I presented to the Commander-in-Chief, I stressed once again the danger of increasing the length of the front without having the necessary reserves and a well-organized rear. I proposed that we should entrench ourselves on the [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|13]]-[[dnipro|Ekaterinoslav|1]] front for the time being, so that the [[volga_river|Volga|2]] and the [[dnieper_river|Dnieper|1]] would be covering our flanks. Then we could detach the troops necessary for operations in the south-east in the direction of [[astrakhan|Astrakhan|3]], and at the same time concentrate three or four cavalry troops at our centre round about [[kharkiv|Kharkov|4]].

When the time was ripe these troops could be used nearer [[moscow|Moscow|2]]. At the same time the rear had to be organized, the regimental cadres enlarged, the reserve forces increased, and new bases established.

General Denikin read my report and then said with a sly look. "I see! You want to be the first man to set foot in [[moscow|Moscow|3]]!"

The next day, the 20th, General Denikin attended Divine Service and reviewed the troops. After the parade, he invited General Yusefovitch and myself into his carriage and read us his order in General Romanovsky's presence. My Army was to march on [[saratov|Saratov|1]], and then on to [[moscow|Moscow|4]] via [[nizhny_novgorod|Nijni-Novgorod|1]], the Army of the Don, commanded by General Sidorin, was to go to [[moscow|Moscow|5]] via [[voronezh|Voronege|1]]-[[ryazan|Riazan|1]], while May-Mayevsky's Army was to advance on [[moscow|Moscow|6]] direct from [[kharkiv|Kharkov|5]] via [[kursk|Kursk|1]], [[oryol|Orel|1]], and [[tula|Tula|1]].

This order, later known as the advance on [[moscow|Moscow|7]], was nothing more nor less than a death-sentence for the Armies of Southern Russia. All the principles of strategy were ignored, there was no choice of a principal direction, no concentration of the bulk of the troops in this direction, and no maneuvering. It merely prescribed a different route to [[moscow|Moscow|8]] for each of the Armies.

General Yusefovitch and I were simply bewildered, but General Denikin himself seemed to be delighted with his plan. When we had read it he added merrily—

"Yes, we are going to advance on big lines now. I shall have to use a large-scale map for this campaign!"

As General Yusefovitch had been appointed to the command of an army corps, I asked the Commander-in-Chief to give me Chatilov, whom I had known for a long time, for my new chief-of-staff.

### II. - ON THE VOLGA

My Army had sustained heavy losses; the long-expected reinforcements had not come from [[kuban_region|the Kuban|5]]. General Denikin had ordered an infantry division and the division of [[terek_region|Terek|2]] Cossacks to rejoin the Volunteer Army; the troops that remained with me were exhausted after their three hundred kilometre march across the desert and their forty days of incessant fighting. I asked the Commander-in-Chief to grant a few days' delay, to give the troops time to recover.

"Certainly, take fifteen days,” was the reply.

I gave the necessary orders, but two days later I received orders to continue the pursuit of the enemy immediately. At once I sent off the 1st corps of [[kuban_region|Kuban|6]] Cossacks, who were less tired than the others, in the direction of [[saratov|Saratov|2]], but they were checked at [[kamyshin|Kamychin|1]]. After the defeat of the Reds at [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|14]], the remnants of their 10th Army had fallen back on this town, where numerous reinforcements from [[moscow|Moscow|9]] had joined them. Also several divisions of the Siberian Army which was opposing Koltchak had been ordered there. The Red artillery was strong, and was reinforced by the whole [[volga_river|Volga|3]] fleet.

As the 1st company could not take the position alone, I sent the 4th cavalry corps to join it, whilst I myself went to [[ekaterinodar|Ekaterinodar|2]] to see about the reinforcements I should have received from [[kuban_region|the Kuban|7]].

The Commander-in-Chief received me in the presence of General Romanovsky. I told him about the condition of my troops: my Cossack regiments only numbered five to six hundred men, and the reinforcements had not arrived. The General Staff was too large for this small contingent. If the effectives could not be increased, it would be best to discharge some of them, and make my army into a regiment.

The General told me that he could do nothing, and that "[[kuban_region|the Kuban|8]] separatists were shirking their duty" in not sending me fresh troops. General Romanovsky advised me to come to a direct arrangement with the Cossack leaders. I replied somewhat dryly that this was not within my province. I commanded an Army, and to negotiate with the Kuban Government was outside my sphere. The Commander-in-Chief ordered Romanovsky to call a meeting of the Cossack leaders and to confer with them in my presence.

The next day General Romanovsky, the Quartermaster-General, the Ataman Filimonov, his colleague, Naoumenko, and I, met to discuss the question of the Cossack reinforcements from [[kuban_region|the Kuban|9]]. The Ataman Filimonov began by saying that the Cossacks were annoyed because their request for a Kubanian Army of their own had not been granted, and General Denikin's promises on the subject had not been carried out. If their request was granted, the whole country would be satisfied, and the reinforcements would be forthcoming. General Romanovsky replied that the Kuban Government could not produce anyone capable of commanding an autonomous army.

"But we are not asking that," said Naoumenko. "Our troops are nearly all under the command of the Commander-in-Chief of the Caucasian Army, he is not a Cossack by birth, it is true, but he is popular throughout the country. If he remains at the head of our army, the Kuban Government and the troops will be satisfied."

I decided to have done with this eternal question once and for all, for it was getting more and more bitter, so I turned towards Naoumenko and said:

"As Commander-in-Chief of the Caucasian Army, I am not responsible for the Kubanian politics; were I at the head of this autonomous Army, I should be. But the Rada's policy is such that there would be only one course for me to take—order my Army to dissolve it."

Silence fell, and General Romanovsky hastened to close the meeting. It broke up without having come to any decision.

Four days later I went back to [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|15]]. When we had taken this town it had been in a terrible state. Most of the townsfolk had been massacred by the Reds, and the houses and shops had been looted. There were several epidemics raging, and the mortality was shockingly heavy. It may have been from lack of labor, or perhaps it was sheer carelessness, but I heard from the residents that twelve thousand corpses had been thrown into a gulley. By the spring all these putrefying bodies had poisoned the town. It took quite a week to bury them all. The streets were full of the bodies of dead horses, more than four hundred were cleared away.

And yet gradually this town of the dead came to life once more. People who had been hidden Heaven knows where came out from their retreats; the peasants brought their produce to the market, and the shops opened. The price of provisions fell. I had taken a hand in bringing about this result.

Immediately after we had taken [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|16]] I had examined the positions on the north of the town and had constructed the necessary fortifications there.

I had sent all the troops I could spare to join those who were already attacking [[kamyshin|Kamychin|2]], and on July 12th we resumed the offensive. After four days of desperate fighting the town was taken. We took thirteen thousand prisoners, forty-three guns, twelve locomotives, one thousand lorries, and a large stock of munitions.

General Denikin detached the new contingents from my Army to reinforce the Volunteer Army. Headquarters informed me that the 1st company of [[don_region|Don Cossacks|3]] and [[terek_region|the Terek|3]] division were to be taken from me to reinforce the main body of troops. The 7th infantry division and the brigade of "plastounes" which had been promised me were not to arrive until later on, but nevertheless I was to continue the advance on [[saratov|Saratov|3]] immediately.

I explained to Headquarters that they were asking the impossible. What had I left without the troops they wanted to take from me, as the infantry would not arrive until after the departure of the other troops? Our losses at [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|17]] and [[kamyshin|Kamychin|3]] had reduced my effective force to three or four hundred men. The reinforcements from Caucasia had not yet arrived, and we were short of saddles and swords, whilst our horses had succumbed to foot-disease. The Reds in [[saratov|Saratov|4]] had received huge reinforcements. [[kuban_region|The Kuban|10]] should have re-equipped my Army, but had not done so on the pretext of financial misunderstandings with Headquarters.

But nothing came of my protest. Headquarters did not withdraw the order, and there was nothing for me to do but obey it. And so I obeyed, fully realizing that, however courageous my troops might be, our efforts could only end in failure.

The troops advanced on [[saratov|Saratov|5]]. [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|18]] was alive once more, the shops, restaurants, and cinemas were open. Unfortunately, as so often happens behind the lines, there were cases of excess and debauchery. I was determined to be ruthless in suppressing them. I learned that a group of officers had been guilty of certain excesses in a restaurant, and I had them court-martialed. A captain was condemned to death. The Civil Governor and the staff officers came to me to beg for mercy for him, but I refused to commute the sentence. He was executed, and his sentence posted up in all the public thoroughfares. Immediately all excesses ceased. We continued to pursue the enemy towards [[saratov|Saratov|6]] with great vigor, in spite of the extreme exhaustion of the troops, who were at the end of their tether. I never ceased to bombard Headquarters with telegrams urgently demanding reinforcements.

On July 26th the enemy began an offensive. They lost a large number of men and part of their artillery, but they forced our 4th company to retreat. The next day this company resumed the offensive and routed the Reds, though sustaining heavy losses. In my report I wrote that a few more such apparent successes would compel us to fall back on the defensive for lack of combatants. General Pokrovsky's forces had come to grips with a detachment of the enemy's cavalry, which greatly outnumbered ours. After three days of bloody fighting Boudennyi's Red cavalry was beaten. But here again we suffered heavy losses, especially in generals and superior officers. Our peril became more and more obvious.

The enemy was continually threatening Admiral Koltchak's front. The Reds foresaw their danger if we should occupy [[saratov|Saratov|7]], so they concentrated many divisions there, taking them from the Siberian front. The consequences of General Denikin's strategical errors were now becoming obvious. He had rejected the plan that I had proposed from the very first, after the liberation of Caucasia, and had thrown our troops into [[donbas|the Donetz|5]] coalfield area. Suddenly circumstances had forced him to transfer a large number of troops to [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|19]], but he was already too late, for Koltchak's Army was in flight by then, and the enemy's entire force was massed against us.

If only we had had enough troops to enable us to reach [[saratov|Saratov|8]], as we had been ordered to do, we might still have done so before the enemy had had a chance to unite all their forces. But, alas, even this was impossible, for we lacked the necessary troops. The only thing that we could do now was to await the promised reinforcements, and when they came resume the offensive. But it was doubtful whether the enemy would give us time for this. I summoned a Council of War. We decided to avoid a definite engagement, should the enemy attack us, and to retreat slowly and piecemeal from every position we held in order to gain time. I gave orders to proceed with the fortification of [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|20]], where I wanted the decisive battle with the Reds to take place.

On August 1st the enemy attacked us all along the line, as well as the Army of the Don, which was covering our flank. We retreated slowly, fighting all the time. As our troops could not get back to [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|21]] immediately, I decided to go to [[ekaterinodar|Ekaterinodar|3]] and see that the Kuban Government sent supplies for its Cossacks.

I got to [[ekaterinodar|Ekaterinodar|4]] and explained the situation to the Ataman. I told him that if the Cossack reinforcements and the supplies did not reach me, I could not possibly hold [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|22]], and if it fell the [[kuban_region|Kuban|11]] would certainly be invaded again. I repeated the same thing to the Government. The Ataman begged me to explain the situation to the Rada. I consented. The President was to send me word of the time at which the Rada would like to receive me. I warned the Ataman that I had to leave for Headquarters at 1 o'clock p m. the next day.

I waited in vain until twelve midday, when at last Naoumenko arrived with an officer from the President of the Rada. This officer told me that the President had heard by the merest accident that I desired to visit the Rada, and regretted that he could not give me an official invitation without knowing if I really wanted one. I replied that as Commander-in-Chief of the Caucasian Army and guardian of the interests of [[kuban_region|the Kuban|12]] regiments, I was ready to do the Rada the honor of explaining the needs of [[kuban_region|the Kuban|13]] Cossacks to it in person, and that the Ataman and the Government knew this as well as I did. I found it was absolutely useless to deal personally with M. Makarenko (President of the Rada and leader of the Opposition). I added that I was leaving in an hour's time, and that the Cossacks would hear from me how much the President of the Rada cared for their welfare.

The officer returned very shortly and said that the Rada was expecting me. Several members of the Rada accompanied him and invited me to go back with them. I told them that I could not postpone my departure, and half an hour later I left for [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|23]].

Things were satisfactory on our fronts and on the [[astrakhan|Astrakhan|4]] front. General Erdeli's troops were advancing, whilst his reconnoitring parties were fifty kilometres from the town. The Volunteer Army was approaching [[kursk|Kursk|2]], [[odessa|Odessa|2]], and [[kiev|Kiev|1]]. [[don_region|The Don|4]] Cossack cavalry, under General Mamontev, was operating in great masses in the enemy's rear, and was already nearly at [[tambov|Tambov|1]], destroying the railroads, blowing up the munition depots as they went, and sending home the recruits the Reds had mobilized.

They had been proceeding with the fortifications at the [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|24]] fort. This stronghold was very useful to us, both as a base and as a psychological factor. But it alone was not sufficient, it needed a garrison fresh enough to fight, and strong enough to be effective.

My Army continued to retreat slowly and came to blows with the enemy daily. The effective force of the cavalry regiments was now reduced to one hundred or one hundred and fifty. One of the regiments of the 6th division had been entirely wiped out. The brigade of "plastounes" was now only the size of a battalion. Certain batteries had horses enough for only one or two guns.

Realizing the Army's plight, I ordered the evacuation of the town to begin. Seven trains were to leave every day. The first thing to be hurried off was the war material; then the civil and military administrations were to go, and lastly those civilians who wanted to leave the town and who had entered their names at the town hall to this effect. There was luggage room for each person to take one trunk and no more. An enormous number of people entered their names, and I heard that in defiance of the regulations the trains were being crammed with merchandise, furniture, and all kinds of things.

The General whose duty it was to supervise the evacuation told me that he could do nothing, things were going to the devil. I do not know whether it was ill-will on the part of the administration, or simply inefficiency, but on the first day only four of the seven trains got away, and on the second day only three.

I singled out several Cossacks from my escort and went to the station. A passenger train was just leaving. The carriages were full of pianos, mirrors, and valuable furniture. I had it all thrown out and smashed. Then I discovered a train with locked carriages. The documents said that they were loaded with munitions. I had them opened. They were not full of munitions, but of passengers, mostly Jews, who wanted to get away and take their merchandise with them. They informed me that they had bribed the station-master and two of his colleagues. I had these three employees court-martialed, and they were hanged the same day. The news of their arrest and execution was communicated to all the railway stations, and after that the evacuation proceeded satisfactorily. Eight trains left daily instead of only seven, and when the Reds approached, the town was completely evacuated.

On August 20th, the long-expected reinforcements arrived, i.e. a brigade of Cossack infantry. It occupied parts of [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|25]], and was reinforced by a cavalry division, the last of the fresh troops that I had at my disposal. I had had to withdraw them from the left bank of [[volga_river|the Volga|4]], thus leaving my right flank uncovered. The majority of my troops, after twenty days’ marching and fighting, were retreating towards [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|26]] with the enemy at their heels. The Soviet Government had given orders that the town was to be taken at all costs.

At the first encounter, our regiment at [[saratov|Saratov|9]], made up for the most part of Red deserters, went over to the enemy, who were occupying our first line of trenches. The 4th division of [[kuban_region|Kuban|14]] Cossacks who were in reserve learned accidentally that things were going badly, and without waiting for orders they saddled their horses, galloped to the scene of battle, they threw themselves upon the enemy, and routed them. This charge cost the Reds dearly. Our soldiers performed prodigies of valor; no one would have imagined that these men had just accomplished a two hundred kilometres’ march during which they had lacked all necessaries, and were now dropping with fatigue.

The position that the [[saratov|Saratov|10]] regiment had abandoned was occupied by a battalion of Cossack infantry. During the battle I had left town and had been present at the cavalry charge. I was informed that a regiment of Red marines, covered by their fleet’s artillery, was attacking one of the sections of our positions where the defences were still incomplete. The marines had already made themselves masters of the right flank of our trenches in one part of the suburbs. I ordered the grenadiers to attack the enemy’s flank, the 4th [[kuban_region|Kuban|15]] division to attack once more, and my escort (because I had no other forces at my disposal) to occupy the northern quarter of the town to prevent the Reds entering that way, whilst I went back to [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|27]].

The streets were full of wounded, ambulance-cars, and lorries. The townsfolk had quitted the town in a panic. Outside Staff Headquarters, they were loading the telephone and telegraph apparatus on to two motor-lorries. My horses were waiting for us. The train which was to take the General Staff away was in the station.

I sent the train on to the next station and ordered the cars to cross the bridge and wait for us on the far side. Then General Chatilov and I, followed by several officers, rode on horseback to the northern part of the town. If there was to be a retreat, I wanted to be with the troops.

A shell fell quite near us and set fire to one of the railway buildings. Another fell on a wooden house and soon reduced it to a blazing furnace. Some members of my escort had preceded us and were already fighting.

We emerged from the town; night had fallen and everything seemed quiet.

“It looks as though we are still holding out,” said Chatilov; “we do not seem to have encountered anybody.”

“Yes, our counter-attack seems to have succeeded.”

By the time we got to a village it was almost dark. One house was lighted up, and saddled horses were waiting outside. It was our 1st corps’ General Staff; they had just received news from our right flank. Everything was proceeding according to plan; [[kuban_region|the Kuban|16]] 4th division had attacked a second time, as I had ordered them to. The Cossacks, still drunk with their previous success, had done wonders; they had annihilated a regiment of marines. My escort had driven the enemy out of the suburbs. The grenadiers too had done their work and repulsed the Reds.

When we got back to the town there was not a soul to be seen. Dispatches from the other generals were waiting for us. The enemy were beaten at every point with heavy losses; but they had not lost hope. At dawn on the 24th they returned to the attack, but were again unsuccessful. In a three-day-long battle we utterly routed the 10th and 11th Red Armies, took eighteen thousand prisoners, thirty-one guns, and one hundred and sixty machine-guns.

And yet the Reds made two further attempts to take [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|28]]. After six weeks of bloody warfare the enemy’s Armies were beaten and their spirit broken. The Caucasian Army, rested and reinforced, had become powerful again after so many victories. [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|29]] was not threatened again for a long while. On October 4th our Army resumed the offensive and advanced fifty kilometres to the north of the town.

The enemy were too demoralized to be a danger to us on our front for the moment, but our numbers were too small for us to be able to dream of marching on [[saratov|Saratov|11]], especially as General Erdeli's troops were retreating in the [[astrakhan|Astrakhan|5]] area, on our right flank.

I asked Supreme Headquarters for fresh orders countermanding the route prescribed by the advance on [[moscow|Moscow|10]]. In reply, General Romanovsky insisted on my resuming the offensive. I tried to answer him, but he appeared to take very little notice of my arguments. Obviously Supreme Headquarters had no grasp of the real situation. I obtained leave from the Commander-in-Chief to go to [[taganrog|Taganrog|1]]1 and make my report to him in person.

I inquired at Supreme Headquarters if the advance on [[moscow|Moscow|11]] was still part of their plan. I found that it was, and though I did my best to prove to them that it was out of the question, General Romanovsky insisted on it. I was heartily sick of the war, and said that since I could not do the impossible, I must request him to replace me with someone more capable.

"You know as well as I do," he replied, "that you are the only man who can do it."

General Denikin's Army continued its rapid march towards [[moscow|Moscow|12]]. It took [[kiev|Kiev|2]], [[kursk|Kursk|3]], and [[oryol|Orel|2]]. Our cavalry was at the gates of [[voronezh|Voronege|2]]. All Southern Russia, with its wealth of provisions of all kinds, was in General Denikin's power, and we heard of new successes daily. But it had been clear to me for a long time, and I had not hidden my opinion from the Commander-in-Chief, that we were building on sand, we had bitten off far more than we could chew. Our front was too long in comparison with the number of our forces, we had no organized bases and no strongholds in our rear.

The enemy, on the contrary, adhered strictly to the principle of strategy. Although they had repulsed my Army at [[tsaritsyn|Tsaritsin|30]], they realized that three months of heavy fighting had weakened them, so that they could not resume the offensive immediately. Consequently the Red Command was now concentrating its forces on the junction of the Volunteer Army and the Army of the Don. The Commander-in-Chief had no troops with which to oppose this new enemy force. Risings were breaking out in the interior, rebels under the command of the brigand Makhno were sacking the towns and looting the trains and commissariat depots. Disorder was at its height in the country. The local authorities had no idea how to make themselves respected; abuse of authority was the order of the day; the agrarian question was more bitter than ever. The Government itself knew only too well what it wanted to do about it. Its underpaid representatives were often dishonest.

Relations with the Cossack organizations, especially with [[kuban_region|the Kuban|17]], had not grown more cordial since Headquarters had left [[ekaterinodar|Ekaterinodar|5]] for [[taganrog|Taganrog|2]], the Rada had become more demagogic than ever, and was putting up a fierce opposition to the Commander-in-Chief.

In spite of all our apparent successes, I thought the future looked far from rosy. I learnt that there was a rumor afloat in political circles that I was in open opposition to General Denikin on military and political questions, and that public opinion was backing me as his successor in the near future. I hardly knew any influential people in so-called "political spheres," and, furthermore, I had not left the Army for months, except to go to Headquarters, so I took the rumors to be mere idle tittle-tattle.

________________________________

1 A town in [[don_region|the Don|5]] district, to which Headquarters was transferred from [[ekaterinodar|Ekaterinodar|6]].
