---
chapter: 15
---

# CHAPTER XV

## CONCENTRATE ON WRANGEL!

Towards the end of August, the balance-sheet of the Bolshevist disaster on the Polish front was drawn up, nearly two hundred and fifty thousand men and tens of thousands of horses had been captured by the Poles or interned in Germany. The remnants of the Bolshevist Army were in precipitate flight towards the east, pursued by the Polish troops.

The Ukrainian units, who were advancing rapidly, were operating on the Polish troops’ right wing. On the right bank of the Ukraine, revolts were flaring up everywhere. Companies of franc-tireurs were harassing the Red troops ceaselessly, and attacking convoys, trains, and echelons on the road.

We had succeeded in coming to an agreement with the Ukrainian franc-tireurs, we were to re-equip them with arms, ammunition, and money, I circulated proclamations amongst the population of the Ukraine urging them to rise and throw off the Bolshevist yoke.

During the last days of August a delegation from the largest company of franc-tireurs arrived. The commander of the company was an ex-officer of the old Imperial Guard, he was fighting for the moment under the yellow and blue Ukrainian flag. According to him, the population on the right bank of the Ukraine were exasperated with the Bolshevists, but the events of 1919 had left unfortunate memories of the Volunteer Army, these, combined with the able propaganda of the Ukrainians, did much to enlist sympathy for the Separatists.

The growing excitement in the Ukraine set Ukrainian circles outside the country in motion. I learnt that a delegation of Ukrainian-Federalists, composed of Messrs. Markotun, Tsitovitch, and Moghiliansky, had left Paris for the [[crimea|Crimea|1]].

The strategical situation was as I had explained it to the French Government. Events on the Polish front made operations in the west of primary importance. If Poland should accept the peace which the Bolshevists were offering so insistently, and Lloyd George's Government was extolling, everything would be over for us. The three and a half Bolshevist Armies on the western front could then rush in on us, and the issue of such an attack could not be doubted. Our last batch of reinforcements—nearly ten thousand "Bredovians"—had been incorporated into the Army. We could not count on any others, except for a few officers who had been evacuated into different countries in 1919. Our local resources in men and horses had dwindled away to nothing. The sole source of recruitment still open to us was our prisoners, but their fighting value was only relative.

I did my utmost to convince the French and Polish Governments that the Poles must go on with the war, or must at least drag out the peace negotiations so that I could reinforce and re-equip my troops with the enormous booty which had fallen into the hands of the Poles, whilst the Red troops were being detained on the Polish front. I considered using the Red units which had gone over to the Poles or those which had been interned in Germany, in addition to the ammunition which the victors had seized. I proposed to form a 3rd Russian Army on Polish territory out of the remains of Bredov's command and the detachments of Bulak-Balakhovitch and Colonel Permykin. I intended to amalgamate the commands of the Polish and Russian troops and put the joint command into the hands of a French general who should work with representatives of the Polish and Russian Armies

I pursued these negotiations during my interviews with the French and Polish representatives, as well as through my representatives in Paris and Warsaw.

In the middle of September the chief of the Polish Military Mission informed me that the Polish Government had agreed to authorize the formation of a Russian Army eighty thousand strong on Polish territory.

The chief of our Foreign Communications telegraphed to Maklakov—

We have just heard that the Polish Government has agreed to the formation of a Russian Army eighty thousand strong, to be recruited from amongst the Bolshevist prisoners. It has been pointed out to us that this measure will simplify the recruiting question, cut down transport expenses from Poland to [[crimea|the Crimea|2]], and give the necessary tame for the development of our forces The Commander-in-Chief is in favor of this measure on the following conditions—

1. This new Army must be placed on the right wing of the group of Polish-Ukrainian Armies, so that in the course of the subsequent offensive it will be able to rejoin the left wing of our Armies.

2. This Army must be called the 3rd Russian Army. At the present moment the Russian forces in [[crimea|the Crimea|3]] are composed of two Armies.

3. The Commander of the 3rd Army must be appointed by General Wrangel.

4. The 3rd Army shall be subject to the Commander-in-Chief of the eastern anti-Bolshevist front until it comes into direct contact with the southern front, when it shall pass under the command of General Wrangel.

Please inform the French Government and High Command of this.

The Polish Government appeared to be willing to meet us. General Miller, our military representative in Paris, telegraphed—

The Poles agree to send their military representative to Paris to discuss the coordination of our military operations with us. The General you send ought to be fully acquainted with all your intentions and plans, and should have a thorough understanding of the situation and your forces

To hurry on the negotiations I decided to send M. Struve and General Yusefovitch to Paris, the latter was to control the formation of the Russian units in Poland, but until he arrived there the task fell upon General Makhrov.

MM. Struve and Yusefovitch were to deliver to the French Government a brief memorandum signed by my adjutant, M. Krivochein, detailing my propositions—

ADJUTANT TO THE COMMANDER-IN CHIEF OF THE ARMED FORCES OF SOUTH RUSSIA

[[sevastopol|SEBASTOPOL|1]],

September 15, 1920.

Confidential

When Poland's luck suddenly changed, the Russian Army was engaged in an attempt to liberate Northern Caucasia. The enemy had concentrated huge forces against our expeditionary force in [[kuban_region|the Kuban|1]], therefore, if we were to follow up our successes there we had to send fresh units to the front from [[taurida|Taurida|1]]. This made the retreat to [[perekop|Perekop|1]] necessary. The Army was already preparing to retreat when the defeat of the Bolshevists on the Polish front made it possible to consider the formation of a united anti-Bolshevist front on the west. Should this plan be adopted, the protection of the Tauridan front will become of primary importance. It will compel us to send fewer reinforcements to the Kubanian front, and later will force us to abandon the operation in [[kuban_region|the Kuban|2]] altogether. Our expeditionary force, whilst still on Kubanian territory, was ordered to send troops into [[crimea|the Crimea|4]]. It came back not only unreduced, but with its effective force considerably increased. Later on, the Russian Army will prepare an offensive, but there can be no hope of a decisive success unless the operation is undertaken in cooperation with the other anti-Bolshevist forces. Such cooperative actions are only possible by agreement. The amalgamation of the Ukrainian troops and the Polish Army is already an accomplished fact. For our part, a military convention with the Ukrainian Army is in course of preparation.

The time is now ripe for the Russian and Polish Armies to cooperate. Every subsequent success, every step forward, can result only from the formation of a common front. And here France assumes a dominating position. The safety of Warsaw, the very independence of Poland on the one hand, and the recognition of the South Russian Government and the help which has been given in the re-equipment of the Russian Army on the other, are the facts which make it obvious that the two Armies will freely consent to cooperate against the Bolshevists under the command of a French general, provided that he works with representatives of the two anti-Bolshevist Armies.

Poland's cessation of hostilities and entry into negotiations with the Soviet Government puts the Russian Army into a very difficult position. The Bolshevist forces now set free will be thrown on to the southern front, and in a few months we shall have three and a half new Bolshevist Armies arrayed against us.

But even under these conditions the Russian Army will not lay down its arms, it will continue the fight, hoping for success and trusting in its ally, France, to whom it has always been loyal, and who can now give it invaluable help. If the negotiations between Poland and Russia are prolonged, and if the troops of Bolshevist prisoners in Poland and Germany are sorted and transported to our front with all speed, together with the remains of General Miller's and General Youdenitch's Armies, we will be able to continue our struggle.

Negotiations must be prolonged until we have had time to transport the contingents from Germany and Poland and recruit the new units.

The contingents which are to be transported must be completely equipped and armed, and the new formations must be furnished with the necessary equipment, this can be supplied from the Bolshevist materials of war which the Poles have captured.

If all this were done, the Russian Army could continue the struggle against the Bolshevists, and, even if it were fighting alone, could be sure of ultimate success. Thus Poland could rest assured that the Bolshevists would be unable to violate the peace treaty.

Over and above the delivery of materials of war to the Russian Army, this project will need still more important financial help in the form of a loan. The refunding of this loan, together with the payments for the materials of war, will be covered by a special treaty concerning the export of coin, coal, and other raw materials to France from the territories occupied by the Russian Army and those they intend to occupy.

We published articles expounding our point of view in many organs of the Russian Press abroad as well as in the newspapers of other countries.

At the same time, I decided to pay a visit to the front with the representatives of the Allied Missions, for on the one hand I wanted to show them how strong our position was, and on the other to prove to them by the evidence of then own eyes that we lacked technical equipment, and urgently needed help if we were to continue the struggle.

On the evening of August 30th I left for [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|2]], accompanied by M. Krivochein, representatives of the French, Polish, American, English, Japanese, and Serbian Military Missions, and several Russian and foreign newspaper correspondents.

On the morning of August 31st the train stopped at [[sovietskyi_taganash|Taganach|1]] Station, and we set off in cars to inspect a section of the fortifications. The fortifications were more nearly complete in this part of the front than anywhere else. There were heavy barbed-wire entanglements, armoured emplacements, a complex labyrinth of trenches, and skilfully-concealed batteries. The newly installed heavy siege-artillery was engaged in gunnery practice, and our aeroplanes were observing for it.

The visitors could see with their own eyes what an immense amount of work had been accomplished in the last few months in spite of the almost complete lack of technical equipment. When we returned to the train we went on as far as [[akymivka|Akimovka|1]] Station, and there inspected the aviation park and General Babiev's splendid [[kuban_region|Kuban|3]] division, which was here in reserve. Our squadron of aeroplanes, under the direction of General Tkatchov, a bold pilot, executed a series of brilliant aerial manoeuvres, which were all the more remarkable because most of the machines were in a very bad state of repair, and only the incomparable boldness of the Russian officer made up for the deficiencies of his material. When the flying was over, the military agents gathered round the intrepid airmen and expressed their admiration. General Tkatchov reported that most of the machines were absolutely worn out, and that if we did not receive new ones very soon, our air force would become powerless. I took the opportunity to mention the efforts I had made to obtain some new aeroplanes and the insurmountable obstacles I had met with, not only from our enemies. For example, the aeroplanes I had bought, after the greatest difficulty, in a certain state1 had been destroyed "by mistake" by one of the foreign Commissions of Control.2

The representative of the English Military Mission, the sympathetic Colonel Walsh, blushed furiously at these words.

General Babiev's division marched past in excellent order. After the review, the Cossacks showed off their horsemanship ("Djighitovka"), and their skill completely captivated the foreign visitors.

In the evening we reached [[melitopol|Melitopol|1]] and joined the General Staff of the 1st Army. Its chief, General Dostovalov, gave us a short explanation of the general position, and informed us of the catastrophes which had dogged General Koutepov's troops in [[taurida|Northern Taurida|2]]. After supper we returned to out train and left for [[fedorivka|Fedorovka Station|1]]. From there we went by car to [[kronsfeld_german_colony_now_vodyane_area|Kronsfeld|1]] colony, on the morning of September 1st. Here we inspected Kornilov's division, which was being held in reserve at the disposal of the Commander of the Army.

The ranks stretched from one end of the huge square to the other. An altar had been erected in the middle of the square, and the priests in glittering robes were performing their offices. The religious canticles soared up into the peaceful autumn air, and far up, a hovering lark mingled his song with them.

The faces of the soldiers were tanned and weather-beaten, their boots scorched and worn out, their shirts discolored and threadbare. Many of the men even lacked shirts altogether, and were wearing woollen vests instead There was one soldier dressed in a patterned cretonne shirt with canvas shoulder-pieces, old khaki trousers, and yellow English half-boots, another had no trousers at all, and was wearing nothing but a pair of woollen drawers. The terrible destitution of the troops simply leapt to the eyes. But with what care they had repaired their old garments, polished up their arms, and dressed their ranks! After the Te Deum I presented the 1st Kornilov Regiment with the Kornilovian flag, which had belonged to the first battalion to be named after General Kornilov. This flag, which had been preserved by an officer who had recently escaped from Bolshevist territory, was regarded as a precious relic by the regiment.

The units marched past. The ranks passed by, one after the other, all beautifully straight, the men's steps firm and vigorous, their faces contented and cheerful. It seemed as if they were the regiments of old Russia resurrected from the tomb.

After the parade, the divisional commander offered us dinner in the village, during the meal I complimented the representatives of the Allied Powers in the name of the Russian Army. In their reply, the foreign representatives expressed their sincere sympathy with us, and their desire to come to our help. These military men, delighted with everything they had just seen, had ceased to be politicians for a moment.

After dinner we went out to inspect, the positions which Markov's and Drosdovsky's reserve divisions were occupying. We found the same appalling want, the same gallant resemblance to the old Russian regiments, the same confident, steady manner.

We returned to our train late in the evening. During the night M. Krivochein, the Allied representatives, and the foreign correspondents left for [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|3]], whilst I went on to [[ishun|Yushun Station|1]], from there I went by car, on September 2nd, to inspect the positions held by the 2nd Army Corps.

The regiments of the 2nd Army Corps had been severely tried during the fighting under [[kakhovka|Kahovka|1]], and had recently been reinforced by units from Bredov's command and by reservists; as a result, they were still only imperfectly amalgamated, and then external appearance could not be compared with that of the regiments of the 1st Army Corps. But they were in a quiet and confident frame of mind. General Vitkovsky was working ceaselessly, doing his utmost to restore order to the Army Corps which his predecessor had so disorganized. On September 5th I returned to [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|4]].

As our troops had evacuated [[kuban_region|the Kuban|4]], the enemy could use some of their troops which were thereby set free for work on the Crimean front. New units were arriving from Caucasia and the interior of Russia, and making for different sections of our front.

The Red group on the right bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|1]], under the command of "Comrade" Eidemann, had received the title of the 6th Army. Its General Staff had arrived quite complete from the northern front. The 6th Army was made up of the 1st, 3rd, 13th (from [[pskov|Pskov|1]]), 46th, and 52nd divisions of sharpshooters, and "Comrade" Goff’s cavalry brigade.

The 2nd cavalry Army, under the command of the ex-Voiskovoi-Starchma3 Mironov, was also operating on the right bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|2]]: it was made up of the 2nd, 16th, and 21st cavalry divisions and a special mounted brigade. The 7th and the 2nd cavalry Armies numbered fifteen thousand bayonets and six thousand sabres altogether.

The 13th Soviet Army was still operating on General Koutepov's front. It numbered thirty thousand bayonets and seven thousand sabres. The 7th, 13th, and 2nd cavalry Armies, together numbered forty-five thousand bayonets and thirteen thousand sabres. On September 1st our effective forces did not exceed twenty-five thousand bayonets and eight thousand sabres.

Having undertaken an operation in the west, we had first to fight the Reds on the northern and eastern sections of the front, and thus free ourselves for an operation on the other side of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|3]]. I decided to let the mounted troops of the Don Army Corps strike a blow and attempt to envelop the left flank of the 13th Soviet Army.

Fighting went on without pause throughout September. The troops had been unable to rest for months past, yet they performed prodigies of valor. In a series of brilliant engagements the Russian Army scattered the enemy's forces all along the front from the Sea of Azov to the Kitchkasse Pass. The task I had set it—that of freeing our hands for an operation on the other side of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|4]]—was accomplished.

Whilst incessant fighting was in progress at the front, intensive work was going on behind-the-lines. I changed my quarters, left the house I had been occupying, and went to a much larger building called the Grand Palace, where the commander of the Fleet had previously had his quarters. My closest colleagues, M. Krivochein and General Chatilov, my chief-of-staff, were also at the Grand Palace.

Our working-day began at seven o'clock, and went on, almost without interruption, until eleven o'clock or midnight. Our attention had to be divided between the most varied problems the war, internal and foreign policy, economics, and finance. These last questions worried M. Krivochein and me more than anything else.

In spite of all our difficulties, we managed to cover our ordinary expenses with our ordinary revenue. But the extraordinary budget for this year showed a deficit of two hundred and fifty milliards4. It is true that, because of the depreciation of the rouble, this figure was less considerable than it seemed, but, nevertheless, it was still very large. [[crimea|The Crimea|5]] was poor in local resources, and certainly could not support the entire machinery and personnel of a huge Army. Although our effective fighting forces did not number more than thirty or thirty-five thousand men (not counting the fleet), the vast interior, the tens of thousands of wounded who filled the hospitals, the huge number of prisoners in the reserve formations, and the concentration camps, the military schools, the numerous organizations behind-the-lines, the administrative departments for War and the Navy, the fleet and the maritime departments, all added to the number of mouths that the Supreme Command had to feed—so that the grand total was something like two hundred and fifty or three hundred thousand. Feeding all these people cost more than all our wealth put together. We were doing all we could to get ammunition from abroad on the strength of our reserve securities.

Corn was now our sole export. The Government, through its agents, continued to buy it up in [[taurida|Northern Taurida|3]]. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry had made contracts with different people between July 24th and September 16th to deliver ten million pouds5 of grain. Nearly a million and a half pounds had already reached the ports, and almost a million had been exported. Not only was corn our sole export and therefore of great economic value, but the arrival of Russian corn from [[crimea|the Crimea|6]] on the markets of Western Europe had also great political importance The Western Powers, especially France, who had suffered greatly during the war, were suffering from a lack of bread, and the arrival at Marseilles of a ship carrying two hundred and seventy-five thousand pouds of Russian corn was mentioned in nearly all the French papers.

The monopoly of the corn trade by the South Russian Government provoked violent criticism from one party in commercial circles which was direly interested in the question. The South Russian Government was accused of "impeding commerce" and "strangling private enterprise". We could not put a stop to these criticisms.

We still had only very faint hopes of obtaining a foreign loan, for the existence of the South Russian Government seemed very precarious, no one believed in its stability.

M. Krivochein thought out the scheme of convoking a special economic conference of industrialists, merchants and financiers at [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|5]] to discuss the possibilities of an economic and industrial revival in South Russia and discover some way of raising a loan. The date of the conference was fixed for the end of September, and the invitations were sent our accordingly. Many of those who were invited, including Count Kokovteov, Davydov, and Rittich, refused to come on some pretext or another, but others accepted the invitation.

The Poles began to negotiate with the representatives of Soviet Russia. The Polish delegation arrived at Riga on September 5th-18th. From the very beginning, a complete divergence in their views was obvious. Each side seemed to postulate conditions which the other could not possibly accept; nevertheless, negotiations were not broken off. Behind the backs of the negotiating parties the clash of interests of the other Powers could be distinctly felt.

It appeared that the Bolshevists had a very clear view of the situation. They foresaw that they would reach an agreement with the Poles in some way or another, and so the Soviet leaders decided to settle accounts with their other enemy. They sent round the watchword "Concentrate on Wrangel!"

The remnants of the Red Armies had flowed back towards the east without a pause before the Polish troops, but the Red Command now launched all its available reserves against the south.

In mid-September we began to receive information that Boudenny's cavalry (the 1st Cavalry Army) was coming south from the south-west section of the Polish front.

Unexpected changes had taken place in the French Government. M. Deschanel, the President of the Republic, had fallen seriously ill and had been compelled to resign. M. Millerand had been elected in his place. M. Leygues was appointed President of the French Council. MM. Petit and Paléologue, the colleagues of the ex-President of the Council, who had supported the policy of a rapprochement with national Russia, had gone out of office. I sent the new President a telegram of congratulation.

On September 20th I went to [[melitopol|Melitopol|2]] for a few hours and conferred with Generals Koutepov and Dratzenko. The preparations for the expedition across [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|5]] had been completed, and the operation was due to begin on September 25th.

On my return journey to [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|6]], I escaped falling a victim to a plot by the purest accident. A quarter of an hour before my train was due, a mine had been discovered. A peasant had been mowing the grass near the railroad and had noticed an electric cable. He had had time to communicate with the signal-box on the line, and my train had been held up at the nearest station The detachment of sappers who were rushed to the spot uncovered a mine of considerable size. If the criminals had been able to carry out their plan, there would not have been much left of our train. Unfortunately, the criminals escaped. A most thorough inquiry was held, and it was established that a certain Stefanovitch-Stivenson knew something of the crime; he was arrested, but escaped from prison a few days later.

A delegation from the National Ukrainian Party arrived in [[crimea|the Crimea|7]], it consisted of its president, Markotun, its secretary, General Tsitovitch, and a member of the Party, one Moghiliansky. The National Ukrainian Party was hostile to Petlioura's Separatist policy, it was spreading the idea of Russian unity with local autonomy for the Ukraine. The Party was working in close cooperation with the Ukrainian Government of [[galicia|Galicia|1]], of which Petruchevitch, who had proclaimed the union with Russia, was president. The National Ukrainian Party had no real strength, but it was sympathetic to us, and had a few connections in the Ukraine and some in France. These could be used to counterbalance the Ukrainian Separatists. Therefore I made a point of showing the greatest attention to the delegation. I received it in the presence of M. Krivochein, M. Struve, the chief of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and General Chatilov, my chief-of-staff. I expressed my complete agreement with its principles as explained by the delegation, and declared that I based my whole policy on the union of all the Russian forces which were in arms against Bolshevism, and that I was ready to support the formation of autonomous national units on the same lines as those adopted in my agreement with the Cossacks, The Party also received some material help.

On September 18th the Atamans of [[don_region|the Don|1]], [[kuban_region|Kuban|5]], [[terek_region|Terek|1]], and [[astrakhan|Astrakhan|1]] organized a banquet in honor of the Ukrainian Party on the premises of the Seamen's Club. The Ataman of [[don_region|the Don|2]], in the name of the Cossacks, welcomed the Ukrainian delegation, which was a personification of the idea of union under Russia, the mother of them all. He led a cheer for Russia. M. Markotun, replying, emphasized the fatal character of the Separatist tendencies which those foreigners who desired the partitioning of Russia were supporting. He dwelt on the results which the South Russian Government had obtained since it had abandoned its uncompromising attitude towards the different nationalities of Greater Russia, and had achieved the union of all the Russian forces in their struggle against the common enemy. In conclusion, he gave the toast of the Commander-in-Chief.

I replied to both speakers. In my speech I pointed out that Bolshevism was a menace not only to Russia, but to the whole world. To the Bolshevists, Russia was nothing but a funeral pile, with the help of which they hoped to set alight the whole of Europe. In our struggle for the cause of Russia we were saving Europe, and Poland owed her recent overwhelming victory largely to us. "The Polish Press had many times expressed the view that Poland is fighting not against the Russian people, but against the representatives of the International. I hope," I said, "that the near future will not give the lie to these declarations, and that Poland will not abandon those who are fighting for the common cause of culture and civilization.”

M. Mikhalsky, the representative of the Polish Mission, emphasized, in the course of his speech, the fact, that although the Polish Government had not mentioned the aim of the war in its declaration, it was, in effect, a fight against the International. "The promise of a new frontier will not stop the war—our Government will not call a halt, for it is sure of victory!"

On September 20th the "Temporary Statute concerning the district Zemstvos" was published. The elections for the district Zemstvos were already over in some of the districts.

The population had shown great moderation and common sense at the elections. The disorganization of local life had given rise to a healthy tendency towards union. In most of the districts the wealthier peasants had been elected, some big landowners had also been returned. The district Soviets which were still in existence in those regions where they had not been replaced by Zemstvos were very hard at work. In most of the districts the inquiry into the redistribution of the land had already been held and finished, and the new terms of ownership sketched out. In some places the peasants' rights of ownership over the land on which they worked had already been consolidated.

In many of the richest districts the wealthier peasants were buying the land directly from the owners. The owners received full payment immediately, and the peasants were free from redemption-payments. The people manifestly wished to possess the land in full ownership, and to acquire it legally. The population was echoing the spirit of the new law.

The number of friendly transactions between peasants and landowners would doubtless have been still larger had it not been for the difficult conditions created by the Civil War and the continual mobilizations which deprived the peasants of manual labor and horses.

Whilst the reorganization of the Zemstvos was going on, the municipal governments were not forgotten. On September 23rd a conference met under the presidency of the Deputy-Director of the Administration of the Interior, it discussed a project concerning the elections for the municipal councils. The basis of the electoral system was to remain intact, the reform was to be limited to the methods used at elections.

On September 2nd, Admiral Sablin, the Commander of our Fleet, fell ill. He had been unwell for a long time, but had been fighting against his illness. Now he was compelled to take to his bed. His disease—cancer of the liver—grew rapidly worse, and his case became hopeless. It was a great loss for the fleet, for Admiral Sablin was energetic and able, and had set the fleet in order in spite of the extreme difficulty of the situation, the lack of material, and the varied composition of the crews which had been recruited haphazard, and were quite untrained. The ships had been cleaned up and repainted and the crews disciplined. Nearly all the damaged equipment had been repaired, and reserve supplies of fuel, amounting to five hundred thousand pouds of coal and one thousand five hundred pouds of oil, had been concentrated in the ports in case of an evacuation. The men-of-war of our squadron were keeping a strict watch on the coast and were covering our movements. Every air-raid that our aeroplanes had undertaken had been successful. There was no hope of Admiral Sablin's recovering, so I offered the post of Commandant of the Fleet and Director of the Ministry of Marine to Admiral Kedrov.

On September 20th we received a French wireless message from [[batumi|Batoum|1]]. The French representative informed us that several thousand Cossack rebels, commanded by General Fostikov, had retreated to the coast in the [[sochi|Sotchy|1]]-Adler Section, after an engagement with the Bolshevists; they wanted to take refuge in [[georgia|Georgia|1]], but the Georgian Government had refused to let them enter the country. The Cossacks were asking for help. I immediately ordered cartridges, shells, and provisions to be sent off to them by transport-ship. I also sent a torpedo-boat to establish communications with the rebels. General Chatilov sailed on this torpedo-boat. He returned on September 22nd.

General Fostikov, who had been organizing his revolt since the summer, had collected several thousand Cossacks. After a series of victorious engagements, he had freed a large part of the [[maikop|Maikop|1]] and [[laba_river|Laba|1]] districts from Red domination. But his position had become difficult after our failure at [[kuban_region|the Kuban|6]]. He lacked ammunition, and little by little the Red troops had surrounded the rebels. General Fostikov foresaw that he would have to evacuate [[kuban_region|the Kuban|7]], and so was trying to get into touch with me through [[batumi|Batoum|2]], where a large number of the Kubanian leaders had congregated after the shameful capitulation of General Bukretov's Army. But all his dispatches had been intercepted by the Kubanian leaders and had not reached me. Finally, General Fostikov learnt from a Bolshevist newspaper which he had picked up at the front that France had recognized the South Russian Government, and so he had attempted to get into touch with me through the French representative at [[batumi|Batoum|3]]. This time I had received his dispatch.

Recently General Fostikov had been entirely surrounded by the Bolshevists, and had been suffering from a terrible shortage of ammunition, so he had decided to retreat to [[georgia|Georgia|2]]. He had persuaded all the Cossacks who had wanted to go back to their own homes to give up the idea and retreat with the others—a detachment of two thousand men—into the [[sochi|Sotchy|2]] area. He was having difficulty in holding out there. He had used up nearly all his provisions and ammunition. The Georgians had refused to let the Cossacks march through their territory. Immediate help was necessary. Unfortunately a storm was raging, which made it impossible for the transport-ship to leave. A few days later the man-of-war set out alone. In the meantime a wireless message arrived announcing that the Cossacks had retreated to [[georgia|Georgia|3]] under pressure from the Reds, the Georgian troops had surrounded and disarmed them. The Reds were demanding their extradition.

I ordered the torpedo-boat which was escorting the transport-ship to embark the Cossacks, cost what it might; should the Georgians put up any opposition it was not to hesitate to open fire on them.

At first the Georgians answered with a summary refusal to allow the troops to embark. After long-drawn-out negotiations, we arrived at a compromise. The Georgians feared the Bolshevists, and would only agree to the embarkation of the Cossacks on condition that we pretended to use armed force! The torpedo-boat hurled a few torpedoes into space, the Georgian detachment retreated, and the Cossacks came on board. I ordered General Fostikov’s detachment of nearly two thousand men to be landed at [[feodosia|Feodossia|1]], where the Cossacks were given rest, clothes, and ammunition, which would enable them to be sent to the front again later on.

________________________________

1 Bulgaria.

2 The English.

3 Cossack Lieutenant-Colonel.

4 A “milliard” is an anachronistic term for a thousand millions, most often referred to today as simply a “billion”PUBLISHER

5 The poud is a Russian measure of weight roughly equivalent to forty English pounds—TRANSLATOR.
