---
chapter: 16
---

# CHAPTER XVI

## ACROSS THE DNIEPER

Preparations for the operation across [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|1]] had been in progress for nearly a month. The collection of the necessary material for pontoon-bridges was a very difficult task, for there was none in the [[crimea|Crimea|1]]. The operation had to be prepared with the utmost secrecy, because its success depended largely on its being a surprise attack It was necessary to make a detailed survey of the banks of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|2]], for the configuration of the lower reaches (the "plavnias") changed every year after the great spring floods. During the last ten days of September we were at last able to launch a pontoon-bridge on [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|3]] near [[ushkalka|Uchkelka|1]], which is in the bend of the river just where the current ceases to flow westwards, and curves back towards the south-west.

The enemy, who had been defeated in the middle of September, were showing no signs of activity on the 1st Army's front. The demoralized units of the 13th Soviet Army were avoiding all contact with our troops, and were apparently combining with the reserves with a view to a future action. The cavalry of the 13th Army was continuing to reconnoitre on the eastern section of the front.

The Reds had concentrated considerable forces opposite General Dratzenko's 2nd Army. In spite of a well-organized espionage service, they did not succeed in discovering in advance the spot at which we intended to cross [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|4]]. But in anticipation of our march towards the west, the Red Command had massed their best units from the southern front on the right bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|5]]. Boudenny's 1st cavalry Army was coming from the south-west front (on the borders of [[galicia|Galicia|1]]) by forced marches, and was making for this section of the line. It was expected on the southern front about October 16th. Before it arrived we had to defeat the enemy forces already massed across [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|6]]—(the 2nd cavalry Army reinforced by infantry units from the 6th and 13th Soviet Armies)—in order to make both its banks safe for us, this was an indispensable preliminary condition of our deeper penetration into the Ukraine.

During the night of September 25th our infantry crossed the ford at the Isle of Khortitza (near [[zaporizhzhia|Alexandrovsk|1]]), they were up to their armpits in water and under artillery and machine-gun fire from the Reds, yet they seized the slopes and began to advance. The enemy retreated before our attack all along the front. On the night of the 26th, the pontoon-bridge on [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|7]] near [[ushkalka|Uchkelka|2]] was ready, and the main body of the 2nd Army began to cross.

From the 26th until the 28th, those units of the 2nd Army which had crossed [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|8]] followed up their advance and repulsed the Reds. Our cavalry broke through the enemy's lines and carried off many trophies. On September 28th they took more than three thousand prisoners, eight guns, six armored cars, and an armored train.

On September 29th General Babiev's cavalry troop advanced south-westwards in an attempt to circumvent the enemy's position at [[kakhovka|Kahovka|1]]. The operation developed favorably.

The Reds strove to check our offensive, for it threatened their principal lines of communication between the 6th and the 2nd cavalry Armies, they attacked us simultaneously on the east (where General Koutepov and the 1st Army were) and at [[kakhovka|Kahovka|2]]. The Red Command hoped to deflect our troops from their set purpose by this manoeuvre, the aim of which was to catch us in a vice, a similar manoeuvre had been tried several times during the summer campaign in [[taurida|Northern Taurida|1]]. The enemy drove back the units on General Koutepov's right wing and advanced on [[melitopol|Melitopol|1]]. But a few days later the Reds were repulsed by the 1st Army all along the front. Local forces had retaken the position we had formerly held before [[kakhovka|Kahovka|3]] and in the Kherson section.

Meanwhile General Dratzenko's 2nd Army was proceeding with its operation. I was very dissatisfied with Dratzenko's conduct, he was behaving in an indecisive, timid manner, and was simply groping his way along. . . . His lack of clear, precise decision, and the absence of a strong lead from the commander of the Army, was having its effect. . . .

On the evening of the 30th I telegraphed to General Dratzenko demanding decisive action. I pointed out that through his indecision we were running the risk of losing everything we had won by our initial successes. Our air-scouts reported that the Reds were beginning to evacuate the armed fortress of [[kakhovka|Kahovka|4]]. I ordered General Vitkovsky's units to attack this position at dawn on October 1st.

I was awakened during the night. General Dratzenko reported that he had encountered a large force of the enemy's troops on the right bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|9]] and had suffered heavy losses, not being willing to risk the complete annihilation of his army, he had been compelled to give the order to retreat to the left bank. . . . The whole operation had collapsed.

At dawn General Vitkovsky's units launched their attack on the armed fortress of [[kakhovka|Kahovka|5]], but they were repulsed. Our units had reached the barbed wire, but had been unable to get through it, they had been forced to throw themselves on the ground, and had suffered heavy losses from the enemy's intensive artillery-fire. The tanks detachment had succeeded in getting into [[kakhovka|Kahovka|6]], but had been killed almost to a man. The information we had received from our observation aeroplanes concerning the evacuation of [[kakhovka|Kahovka|7]] had been absolutely incorrect.

In spite of the repeated demands which I sent to the staff of the 2nd Army throughout that night, I could obtain no details of the events which had taken place on the left bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|10]]. We merely learnt that the retreat had been effected on the north under cover of the Kubanian sharpshooters commanded by the gallant General Tayganok, and on the west, under cover of [[terek_region|the Terek|1]] plastounes from [[firsivka_tentative|Firsovka|1]]. The cavalry was in complete disorder, the artillery and transport formed a long ribbon which was winding over the bridges towards the left bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|11]].

At nine o'clock in the morning I received a laconic telegram from General Dratzenko. "General Babiev was killed by a shell today—September 30th." This explained everything. With the death of their adored leader the cavalry had lost heart, their nerve had gone, and with it their faith in then own strength. General Naoumenko, who had taken over the command, had also been wounded and was unable to save the situation. The regiments had fallen a prey to confusion. The units were making for the bridges with all speed. The enemy, much heartened, had resumed the offensive. The confusion in the ranks of the disabled cavalry grew still greater. There was no longer any possibility of restoring order.

Everyone was hurrying towards the bridges. The cavalry and infantry units mingled in the narrow forest paths and hollows. . . General Dratzenko, much moved by this spectacle, had given the order for a general retreat to the left bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|12]].

Towards the evening of October 1st, our units had retreated across [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|13]]. The pontoon-bridge had been taken apart and towed to the left bank. On the morning of October 2nd the Samur and [[terek_region|Terek|2]] regiments, who had been covering the retreat, also retired, crossing the river in boats.

The Trans-Dnieper operation was over. It had been thought out carefully, prepared cleverly, and developed strictly according to plan, and yet it had ended in failure. Our failure was due partly to that disastrous accident, the death of General Babiev, and partly and more importantly to the inept manoeuvres of General Dratzenko, Commander of the 2nd Army. He acknowledged this himself with rare moral courage and quite winning honesty, and begged to be released from his command.

On September 26th we had received news that the Poles had signed an armistice. Hostilities had ceased on the Polish front, and the Red Command was free to hurl its entire forces against us. At the same time the negotiations which my representatives were pursuing with the French Government led us to hope that France would not abandon us and leave us helpless. M. Struve reported that he was negotiating a French loan for which the auspices were favorable, and that later on we might expect help in the form of ammunition. In a few days' time a French High Commission, accompanied by a Military Mission, was to leave for [[crimea|the Crimea|2]]. The Crimean representatives of the Polish Government continued to assure us that the Poles sincerely desired to reach an agreement with us, and gave us to understand that the signature of the armistice was only a forced concession to England, and was far from being a peace.

A daily paper reached [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|1]] containing an interview with Prince Lubomirsky, the diplomatic representative of the Polish Military Mission in [[crimea|the Crimea|3]]—

Prince Lubomirsky, a member of the Polish Military Mission, has just arrived in [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|2]] from Warsaw. In an interview with our correspondent, Prince Lubomirsky discussed several interesting questions of the moment.

The conclusion of the armistice with the Bolshevists was due to a whole series of reasons. The Polish Government wants neither the armistice nor a peace. In spite of the terrible Russo-German war which was fought out on Polish territory, the Polish people have nothing but hatred for the Bolshevists, they are ready to continue the war against them. The principal reason for the armistice is that, except for France, the Western countries not only refuse to support Poland, but even insist on the cessation of the war with the Soviets.

Europe's policy is dictated by the following causes: the post-war industrial revival demands raw materials, there is a shortage of the materials which formerly came from Russia, and the gap cannot be filled from elsewhere. In the West they imagine that the moment they conclude a peace with the Soviets, Russia will begin to flow with rivers of milk and honey. It is the Bolshevists themselves who have fostered this attitude, hiding the truth from the West. In addition to this principal cause, circumstances of a technical kind have also exerted an influence on the signing of the armistice. The Czechs would not let material of war and ammunition come through into Poland. The free town of Dantzig was holding up all goods addressed to Poland. The Polish troops were very short of shells in spite of the help which their gallant friend, France, had given them. All these reasons taken together have forced the Polish Government to conclude not a peace but an armistice.

On the subject of an alliance between Poland and General Wrangel, Prince Lubomirsky said:

Polish administrative circles are very sympathetic to the idea of an alliance with General Wrangel, I am certain that such an alliance will be concluded in the very near future.

Although the Polish Armies had suspended hostilities, the Polish Government was still able to help us very effectively by prolonging the negotiations and so detaining the Red forces on the western front. We kept open our lines of communication with the Poles only with the greatest of difficulty. We only managed it at all through the intermediary of France. Our attempts to establish communications with Warsaw by wireless came to nothing. In spite of all my demands, the Inter-allied High Commissioners categorically refused to give us permission to set up a wireless station on the site of the old Russian Embassy at [[buyukdere_istanbul|Bouyouk-Dere|1]].1

Although I cherished no great illusions about our "foreign friends," I did not give up hope that the Polish Government, under pressure from France, would delay the conclusion of the peace as long as possible, in order that we might complete the formation of our Army on Polish territory, or at least have time to transfer Russian troops to [[crimea|the Crimea|4]].

Once we had received reinforcements and materials of war and had arranged the projected loan, we would be able to continue the struggle. With this goal in view, it was essential that we should keep our hold on [[taurida|Northern Taurida|2]]. A retreat beyond the isthmus into the Crimean peninsula would not only condemn us to hunger and every kind of privation, but would be the confession of our powerlessness to continue an active struggle, this would deprive us of all future help from France. Once we were shut up in [[crimea|the Crimea|5]], we would cease to be a menace to the Soviet Government, and therefore to be of any interest to the Western Powers.

The failure of the Trans-Dnieper operation was having its inevitable reaction on the spirits of the troops. Our recent heavy losses had still further weakened our effective forces, and we could not fill in the gaps immediately. The fortified camp at [[kakhovka|Kahovka|8]] was a continual menace to us. The enemy all along our front were receiving reinforcements daily. Boudenny's cavalry was expected to reach one of the sections on the right bank of [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|14]] the second week in October. When the 1st cavalry Army arrived, the enemy's forces would be three or three and a half times greater than ours, then effective cavalry force was five times that of ours. Furthermore, their artillery and technical equipment was vastly superior to ours.

On October 1st I summoned Generals Koutepov and Chatilov to a conference. I proposed that my most intimate colleagues and I should discuss every aspect of the following question: ought we to risk a battle in front of the Crimean Passes, or should we evacuate [[taurida|Northern Taurida|3]] and retreat behind the isthmus? We took into consideration all the prevailing conditions, and were unanimous in our decision to risk a battle in [[taurida|Northern Taurida|4]]. It was a last desperate venture, but any other decision would inevitably have led straight to the final crash. At [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|3]] I found news awaiting me that Poland had signed the peace. It had been signed by Russia and the Soviet Ukraine on one side, and Poland on the other. The independence of the Ukraine and of White Russia was guaranteed, and both parties waived their indemnity rights. Poland received compensation for all property evacuated from her territory since August 1, 1914. The treaty containing the preliminary peace terms had been signed on September 29th, and the interview with the Polish diplomatic representative which had appeared in the papers on October 1st had been given after the signature of the peace treaty. The Poles were consistent in their duplicity.

The news that Poland had signed the peace did not create much of a stir amongst the largest classes of our population. The majority of the people did not realize its direct bearing on the future of our struggle, nor did they understand the importance of the failure of our Trans-Dnieper operation. The General Staff's communique on the trophies taken during the five days' operation—thirteen thousand five hundred prisoners, twenty-seven guns, six armored cars, and one armored train—saved the population from realizing that we had suffered a serious defeat. I did my utmost to prevent the news of our failure from becoming current. It was now more necessary than ever that foreigners should be convinced of the stability of our position.

The last sitting of the Financial and Economic Conference took place on October 4th in my presence. I thanked the members of the Conference for the support which they had given the South Russian Government, and expressed my conviction that when they went abroad they would not slacken in their support of the Russian National Cause. I mentioned the difficult struggle which we were undertaking and the privations which the Army was suffering, and remarked casually that the enemy's numerical superiority—for they could now use their entire force against us—and our own lack of ammunition would oblige us to retreat into [[crimea|the Crimea|6]], "but soon, when we have rested and reorganized, we intend to renew the struggle."

I could foresee that the decisive battle in [[taurida|Northern Taurida|5]] would turn out badly for us, and I was preparing public opinion in advance.

On October 5th the Financial and Economic Conference finished its work; it proposed a series of practical financial and industrial measures, and adopted a resolution declaring amongst other things that—

The Financial and Economic Conference cannot but bow respectfully to the huge task and the civil and military exploits which the South Russian Government are accomplishing at this very moment, and to the results which they have achieved in so short a time. In a country ravaged by war and the crimes of the Bolshevist Government, the bases of a free economic life and a new civil order are rapidly being established.

The same day I gave a supper in honor of the members of the Conference. MM P. Bark, V. Riabuchinsky, V. Gourko, and others spoke. M. Riabuchinsky's speech was particularly brilliant and vigorous. I read my order to the Army referring to Poland's peace treaty with Soviet Russia.

ORDER FROM THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE RUSSIAN ARMY

[[sevastopol|SEBASTOPOL|4]]. NO. 3697. October 6-19, 1920.

TO EVERY RUSSIAN SOLDIER

The Polish Army which has been fighting side by side with us against the common enemy of liberty and order has just laid down its arms and signed a preliminary peace with the oppressors and traitors who designate themselves the Soviet Government of Russia. We are now alone in the struggle which will decide the fate not only of our country but of the whole of humanity. Let us strive to free our native land from the yoke of these Red scum who recognize neither God nor country, who bring confusion and shame in their wake. By delivering Russia over to pillage and ruin, these infidels hope to start a world-wide conflagration.

It is now nearly three years since the Russian Army set its feet on the path to Calvary. Weak in numbers but strong in spirit we bore our cross, unshakably convinced that our just cause would triumph in the end. Scarcely six months ago we were on the very brink of the abyss, and the infidels were already preparing to celebrate their triumph with our blood. By the united effort of all the loyal sons of the Motherland, we tore victory once again from the hands of the enemy, and for the last six months we have fought them without cease.

Soldiers! The freed lands of Russia look upon you with love, our brothers in the Red butchers' dungeons put their faith in you; and I, your old comrade-in-arms, trust my invincible eagles. This is not the first time that we have waged unequal warfare. God is not on the side of might, but of right.

GENERAL WRANGEL

On October 6th I received a telegram from Ataman Semenov who was in command of the fighting in the far east of Russia. It ran as follows—

I understand the character of the Cossacks, the native tribes and the peasants who live on the borders of eastern Russia, and I have come to the irrevocable decision, that not only must I recognize in your person the Government of South Russia, but also that I must submit to you as to the successor of the legitimate Russian Power, whilst I remain the chief authority in far eastern Russia and retain the powers of Commander-in-Chief and Pokhodny Ataman2 of the Cossack troops of [[transbaikalia|Transbaikalia|1]], Amur, [[ussuri_region|Oussouria|1]], Yenissey, Siberia, Orenburg, and Bachkiria, the last four States having become our property, together with their Governments.

The rural population which was intoxicated with the delights of Bolshevism has already begun to grow sober again, the volunteer Cossacks, the native tribes, and the peasants, are returning to our side. The units of my Army find this state of affairs in [[transbaikalia|Transbaikalia|2]], the [[ussuri_region|Oussourian region|2]] and Northern [[mongolia|Mongolia|1]]. In my own name and in that of my troops and the population which is subject to me, I compliment you on the great services which you have rendered to your country.

COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF AND POKHODNY ATAMAN, LIEUT-GEN. SEMENOV

Gallant General Babiev's funeral took place on October 5th, I was oppressed with sadness as I followed my old comrade's coffin. Still another of our glorious heroes was dead. Yet another name had been added to the long list of Russian warriors who had expiated their country's shame with their blood.

On October 6th the French Mission, with the Count de Martel at its head, arrived on board the cruiser Provence. A guard-of-honor formed of Cossacks of the Guard was awaiting it on the quayside. General Viazmitinov, Chief of the Military Administration, and M. Tatichechev, Deputy-Director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, welcomed the Mission in my name. A large two-storied house was reserved for it.

The following day I received the Count de Mattel in the presence of my adjutant, M. Krivochein, my chief-of-Staff, General Chatilov, and M. Tatichechev. The Count de Mattel brought with him Admiral de Bon, Commandant of the Mediterranean Squadron (the cruiser Provence was his flagship), his chief-of-staff, General Brousseau, the chief of the French Military Mission, and Colonel Buchenschutz, its chief-of-staff.

When he gave up his letters of credit, the Count de Mattel said to me—

My Government has appointed me its representative to Your Excellency under the title of High Commissioner of the French Republic, and thereby seeks to emphasize the importance it attaches to the alliance and sincere friendship which has always existed between the French and the Russian people in spite of all trials and tests. We can never forget the invaluable help which Russia gave us at the beginning of the war, when the waves of the German invasion were breaking over our frontiers. We know that the Peace of Brest-Litovsk was the work of a distinct minority, which alone was responsible for that piece of treachery. France has never attempted any compromise with the Soviet Power, which of its own free will has put itself outside all known laws.

France is the sincere friend of all true defenders of liberty, law, and order, that is why she has recognized, with the sincerest sympathy, that Your Excellency has established a democratic Government which respects the rights of national minorities and relies for support on an Army which is in close touch with the people.

France, who is still working to repair the ravages of the war, and has not yet rebuilt all her own ruins, has decided to give you her full moral support, and as much material help as possible.

You know the President of the Republic's feelings for Russia. M. Leygues, the head of the French Government, has defined his policy clearly in the following words, which he addressed to the Parlement: “We want the Russian people, who are so simple and good, so interesting, so worthy to live an honorable and powerful life, to find peace, order, and prosperity once again."

It is as the representative of such feelings that I have come to [[crimea|the Crimea|7]]. Most cordially and sincerely I put my support and help at your disposal, both as a conscientious executor of the wishes of the French Government and as a sincere friend of the Russian people.

I replied to the Count de Mattel's speech in the following words—

It gives me the deepest pleasure to welcome France's representative to Russian territory. National Russia is bound to France by traditional feelings of friendship and affection. I would like to express my profound gratitude to the Republican Government for taking the initiative in declaring itself unequivocably in favor of the cause of Russian regeneration.

At the very moment when the shameful conspiracy overthrew every vestige of law and order in Russia and forced the country into making a dishonourable capitulation to the enemy, Russian patriots were already engaged in the struggle against the enemies of their country. That struggle has been going on now for nearly three years, and we are firmly resolved to fight it out to the finish, not because we are animated by any warlike spirit, but because we are inflexibly determined to free the people of Russia from the tyranny which is oppressing them, and to make it possible for them to decide their own destiny.

You can rely upon us giving you our most whole-hearted support, and you may rest assured that we most sincerely wish to second you in the execution of the high task which has been entrusted to you.

At four o'clock on the same day I visited the Count de Martel on board the cruiser Provence.

On October 8th I invited the members of the Mission to dinner. After dinner I mingled with my guests. The hall was brilliantly lighted and decorated with flowers and the resplendent uniforms of the guests, it hummed with animated conversation. I went up to General Dragomirov. "Well," he said, "we are about to set out on the highroad."

I forced myself to give him a pleasant answer, but my thoughts were far away, out in [[taurida|Northern Taurida|6]], where our fate was being decided. Amongst all this brilliant merry-making, gloomy forebodings clutched at my heart.

On October 9th Admiral de Bon held a lunch in my honor on board the cruiser Provence, which was leaving the same day for [[constantinople|Constantinople|1]]. Admiral de Bon was a charming old man and quite captivated me. He was Russia's sincere friend, and remained so later when we were in exile. After lunch, M. Krivochein and I had a long conversation with Admiral de Bon, the Count de Martel, and General Brousseau, we explained our opinions and our needs to them. The Admiral was going straight to Paris from [[constantinople|Constantinople|2]], and once there, he hoped to be able to get our most urgent needs satisfied.

The negotiation of the loan was going on quite satisfactorily in Paris. Maklakov telegraphed—

Struve wishes to inform you that on October 20th he was received by M. Leygues, President of the Council, and on the 22nd by the President of the Republic, to whom he explained the financial situation and our plans for the loan. His attitude was very friendly, and there are great hopes of success.

The transport-ship Rion was on its way to [[crimea|the Crimea|8]] with a cargo of warm clothes, ammunition, etc., for the troops. It seemed that the long-awaited help was about to arrive at last. But was it not now too late?

We received news from the front of the continual arrival of the enemy's reinforcements. All the reserves at the disposal of the Red Command which could be transferred from the interior of Russia, Western Siberia, or the Polish front, were now being sent southwards. The bands of the famous "Father" Makhno, who up till now had been "working" behind the Red lines, suddenly realized the possibility of profits to be made from plundering [[crimea|the Crimea|9]], and joined the Soviet troops. The enemy's forces grew larger every day. The General Staff of the 4th Red Army, which had been beaten by the Poles at the battle of Warsaw, when some of its divisions had been interned in Germany, had arrived in [[zaporizhzhia|Alexandrovsk|2]] from the western front.

Nature herself seemed to be against us. An intensely cold spell set in, a most unusual thing for this time of the year. Our troops, who were thinly clad, suffered appallingly from the cold, many soldiers had frost-bitten limbs. The temperature fell yet lower. The troops dwindled away.

At the same time as the Red Command was throwing all its available forces southwards, it was also taking measures to increase its propaganda work behind our lines.

Lately, the Greens had redoubled their activity. There had been a recrudescence of military espionage inspired by the Registration Bureau ("Registrod") on the Caucasian front, which had its headquarters at [[rostov_on_don|Rostov|1]] on [[don_river|the Don|1]]. The "Registrod" sent scouts into our midst under registration marks, numbers five and thirteen were stationed at [[temryuk|Temriuk|1]] in [[kuban_region|the Kuban|1]], and there were special numbers on the shores of the [[taman|Taman|1]] peninsula. From [[temryuk|Temriuk|2]] and by way of [[taman|Taman|2]] the Red spies crossed the narrow [[kerch|Kertch|1]] Pass, landed on the [[kerch|Kertch|2]] peninsula, and set out for [[crimea|the Crimea|10]], later they returned by the same route.

In one month alone six Soviet spies were caught in the town of [[kerch|Kertch|3]] and its suburbs, and the liaison service which the Bolshevists had organized between our territory and the Tamanan Coast was discovered. In [[kerch|Kertch|4]] and the hamlet of Yurgaky (on the Sea of Azov) this service was preparing secret stations equipped with signal-lights, spherical mirrors for signaling by heliography, and materials for chemical writing. On one of the spies we found, amongst other documents, an order to "rouse Mokrohoussov" with instructions how to find him.

Under the expert direction of General Klimovitch, our counter-espionage service foiled each of the enemy's attempts. The enemy agents who fell into our hands were court-martialed and mercilessly punished. I fought with all my might against these attempts at subversion, yet at the same time I strove to uphold the authority of the machinery of justice and its independence from all representatives of the administrative authorities, however highly placed these might be.

An order published on October 9th definitely established the independence of the Military Jurisdiction, which until now had been, in the person of the Attorney-General of the Army and Navy, subject to the chief of the Military Administration, and obliged to take its orders from the Ministry of Marine on questions concerning the fleet.

Groups of the so-called "Democratic Opposition," filled with fumes which had been generated at the beginning of the Revolution, were still committing and defending the mistakes which had been committed in every phase of our struggle. Blind and obstinate in their defence of “the conquests of the Revolution," which gave them an alluring semblance of prestige and influence, these groups were inclined to regard every measure which they did not initiate as a menace to these "conquests." These groups included some elective organizations (several Zemstvos and Municipalities), and also some of the professional syndicates and the most considerable of the Co-operative Unions—the Tsentrosoyouz and its branches—the Tsentrocektzia, the Dnieprosoyouz, and the Zdravsoyouz.

From the very fast days of the March Revolution these organizations had made a rule of recruiting their staffs from amongst those who had served a term in revolutionary politics. Therefore the great majority of their organizations were packed with elements which understood Bolshevist and semi-Bolshevist ideas, however much they camouflaged them, much better than the ideals of the Russian Army, which had adopted the principle of military dictatorship as an aid to success in its fight to the death.

These groups did not hesitate to give surreptitious protection, or even active help to our enemies, whenever this did not conflict with the "morals of the party" or its commercial interests.

In this connection the activity of the Tsentrosoyouz and its branches merits special mention. In 1919 it had been proved by documentary evidence that when the Volunteer Army was occupying [[odessa|Odessa|1]], [[kiev|Kiev|1]], and [[kharkiv|Kharkov|1]], the Tsentrosoyouz, the Tsentrocektzia, and the Dnieprosoyouz had been in communication with the Soviet Government, received subsidies from it, and carried out its orders, supplying the Red Army and the provinces of Northern Russia with materials and provender. An examination of the account-books of the Tsentrosoyouz and its [[kharkiv|Kharkov|2]] branch and those of the Popular Bank of [[moscow|Moscow|1]] established the fact that the Tsentrosoyouz had received fifty million roubles from the Soviet Government, whilst merchandise destined for Soviet Russia had been found in the Tsentrosoyouz's local depots. Amongst the other co-operative organizations, the Tsentrocektzia (Workmen's Co-operative), the Dnieprosoyouz, and the Zdravsoyouz enjoyed the special favor of the Soviet Government, and had received important subsidies from the Soviets for putting themselves at their service, for this service they had used their branches on the territory occupied by the Russian Army!

A "General Plan of Work for the Year 1920", found in September 1920 during a police-raid on the Tsentrosoyouz Offices at [[kerch|Kertch|5]], will serve as a specimen of the Tsentrosoyouz's activities in [[crimea|the Crimea|11]] in the Bolshevist interests. This plan had been sent to the office at [[kerch|Kertch|6]] by M. Dobrovolsky, manager of the Tauridan counting-house of the Tsentrosoyouz, and was followed by a letter from M. Vonov, a director of the southern section of this organization, it mentioned the following achievements—

1. Buying up of raw materials and sending them untouched to the northern provinces and abroad

2. Preparation of semi-manufactured goods and sending them to the north to be finished in the Tsentrosoyouz's factories

3. Production of manufactured articles and sending them into Northern Russia

Some goods had been sent to Northern Russia by way of [[batumi|Batoum|1]] and [[georgia|Georgia|1]], and some by a ruse, merchandise would be accumulated in localities which it was believed that the Volunteer Army was about to evacuate, then the abandoned goods would be sent immediately to Soviet Russia, credited to the branches of the Tsentrosoyouz.

A Soviet law of March 20, 1920, had changed all the co-operative organizations of Soviet Russia into “communal distributive organizations.” The central organization of the Tsentrosoyouz at [[moscow|Moscow|2]] had come under this law. It had been transformed into a central organ for the provisioning of Soviet Russia. Naturally the owners of the Tsentrosoyouz had not given up their capital and independence with a good grace, but they had been compelled to do so by sheer force and other measures of repression. For some time the co-operative organization abroad (the Inocentre), which was in London, under the management of MM. Berckenheim and Salheim and Mme. Lensky, was the only branch to keep its independence besides the branch in [[crimea|the Crimea|12]].

It would have been natural under these conditions if the Inocentre in London had collaborated with the Russian Army to prevent the total absorption of the co-operative organizations by the Bolshevists. Nothing of the kind had happened. On the contrary, when the Soviet delegation led by Krassin, Noghin, and Razumovsky had arrived in London, Berckenheim had communicated with them and offered his good offices to obtain a commercial treaty for Soviet Russia.

This last action unmasked the Tsentrosoyouz's real policy at a moment when its Crimean representatives were assuring the South Russian Government of its devotion to our cause.

These tendencies explain the hostility which the Tsentrosoyouz showed towards us in all its "non-commercial" activities, to which this organization devoted five per cent, of its capital. These "non-commercial" activities, which consisted of organizing libraries and conferences and editing books and pamphlets, had been developed on quite a large scale.

In later days, when we had been compelled to leave the country, some of the men who had been in charge of the South Russian branch of the Tsentrosoyouz, and had played an important part in politics, were to be found amongst the members of the Soviet Mission to [[constantinople|Constantinople|3]], whilst others of their colleagues in the Tsentrosoyouz took posts as Soviet representatives in [[trabzon|Trebizond|1]], Zunguldak, and even London.

On September 25th the activities of these people were investigated. The houses of several of them were raided, which caused a veritable panic. The leaders of the Opposition in the municipality of [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|5]], with the Mayor of the town, a Revolutionary Socialist, at their head, drew up a memorandum and sent it to the French High Commissioner, it was one long calumny, and was intended to discredit the South Russian Government in every way in the eyes of the French representative. The facts cited in the memorandum were either distorted or entirely fictitious.

In spite of all the precautions which these traitors took, we managed to obtain a copy of this memorandum. I made up my mind to put an end to this game whilst it was still in its early stages.

A Press Congress was to be held in [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|6]] on October 30th. A group of journalists asked me for an interview in connection with it. I took the opportunity to tell them how important the recognition of France was to us in our present circumstances, especially now that Poland had signed the peace. I pointed out that we could rely on help from France only if her Government was convinced of the justice of our cause, and I expressed my indignation at this document, which was the work of Russian men who put their personal or party interests before the common cause, and were base enough to serve the enemy by endeavoring to destroy foreign confidence in us. In proof of my charges, I showed the journalists the memorandum which the Mayor of [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|7]] and others had sent to the French. I saw that they were sincerely indignant.

By the next day the shameful story had gone all round the town, rousing general indignation against the Mayor and several of the municipal councilors. The Mayor attempted to offer me his "explanations", but I refused to receive him. He bowed to public opinion, resigned his mayoral office, and left [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|8]].

[[don_region|The Don|1]] Cossacks were holding their "Krug"3 at [[yevpatoriya|Eupatona|1]]. I went over there with Count de Maud, at his invitation, to attend the sitting on October 14th.

In my reply to the president's address of welcome, I again made a short reference to the possibility of a "temporary" retreat of the Army towards the isthmuses. After the sitting, the members of the Krug invited us to dinner at the Hotel Beyler. In reply to the Ataman's address, the Count de Martel made a long speech—

Gentlemen, I am indeed happy to be in your midst at this grave and decisive moment in the life and destiny of your country. France has ever been Russia's friend, and now it grieves her deeply to see your rich and beautiful country ruined by the violence of a handful of individuals.

France has never compromised with the Bolshevists. She has always been at the head of the world-wide anti-Bolshevist movement, and she greets General Wrangel's accession to power with delight, for he has undertaken to weld together all those men who wish to continue the struggle and defend the rights of the Russian people in spite of innumerable difficulties. France realizes that although the war against Germany has been brought to a victorious conclusion, there will be no general peace until there is peace in Russia, and Bolshevism, which was imported from Germany, is swept from Russian soil. France realizes too that the Cossacks have always been in the vanguard of the Civil War, and that they will continue this fight against the enemy, however difficult and murderous it may be. You are fighting to save millions of Russian men who have been condemned to death, a handful of men whose egotism is unparalleled in all the annals of history will dispose of them mercilessly, as they would ruin [[crimea|the Crimea|13]] tomorrow were it not defended by such a vigorous Commander-in-Chief, a knight "without fear and without reproach," who is entrusted with the task of keeping order and peace, and of safeguarding the rights of every citizen. I wish very sincerely that your land which is still occupied by the enemy may soon see the realization of its hopes. You have chosen the only sane course—that of union another effort, and you will reach your goal, you will achieve peace for [[don_region|the Don|2]] and your villages.

I cherish the hope that my expectations may soon become accomplished facts, and I have pleasure in conveying to you the best wishes of France, and fraternal greetings from your friends and allies, who will spare no effort to come to your help wherever it is possible for them to do so.

In the evening we left for [[sevastopol|Sebastopol|9]].

On October 13th the enemy had begun to cross [[dnieper_river|the Dnieper|15]] near [[nikopol|Nikopol|1]]. Fighting was also in progress on other sections of the front.

On October 15th the Reds launched a general offensive all along the front.

________________________________

1 Near [[constantinople|Constantinople|4]].

2 A Cossack title corresponding to Commander-in-Chief of Cossack troops.

3 "Krug" = Cossack Regional Parliament.
